.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-

.\" Filename: msmtpq.1
.\" Author:   David Nebauer
.\" History:  2022-11-01 - created

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" NOTES
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.ig

For header (.TH), first parameter, NAME, should be all caps
Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
Other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.

Some roff macros, for reference:
.nh        disable hyphenation
.hy        enable hyphenation
.ad l      left justify
.ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.nf        disable filling
.fi        enable filling
.br        insert line break
.sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
for manpage-specific macros, see groff_man(7) and man(7)

Formatting [see groff_char (7) and man (7) for details]:
\(aq  : escape sequence for (')
\[dq] : plain double quote
\[lq] : left/open double quote
\[rq] : right/close double quote
`     : left/open single quote
'     : right/close single quote
\(em  : escape sequence for em dash
\(en  : escape sequence for en dash
\.    : escape sequence for period/dot
\(rg  : registration symbol
\(tm  : trademark symbol
\fX   : escape sequence that changes font, where 'X' can be 'R|I|B|BI'
        (R = roman/normal | I = italic | B = bold | BI = bold-italic)
\fP   : switch to previous font
        in this case '\fR' could also have been used
.B    : following arguments are boldened
.I    : following arguments are italicised
.BI   : following arguments are bold alternating with italics
.BR   : following arguments are bold alternating with roman
.IB   : following arguments are italics alternating with bold
.IR   : following arguments are italics alternating with roman
.RB   : following arguments are roman alternating with bold
.RI   : following arguments are roman alternating with italics
.SM   : following arguments are small (scaled 9/10 of the regular size)
.SB   : following arguments are small bold (not small alternating with bold)
        [note: if argument in alternating pattern contains whitespace,
               enclose in whitespace]
.RS x : indent following lines by x characters
.RE   : end indent

Bulleted list:
   A bulleted list:
   .IP \[bu] 2
   lawyers
   .IP \[bu]
   guns
   .IP \[bu]
   money
Numbered list:
   .nr step 1 1
   A numbered list:
   .IP \n[step] 3
   lawyers
   .IP \n+[step]
   guns
   .IP \n+[step]
   money
..

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" SETUP
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------

.\" Macro: Format URL
.\"  usage:  .URL "http:\\www.gnu.org" "GNU Project" " of the"
.\"  params: 1 = url
.\"          2 = link text/name
.\"          3 = postamble (optional)
.\"  note:   The www.tmac macro provides a .URL macro package; this
.\"          is a local fallback in case www.tmac is unavailable
.\"  credit: man(7)
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..

.\" Prefer .URL macro from www.tmac macro package if it is available
.\"  note: In the conditional below the '\n' escape returns the value of
.\"        a register, in this the '.g'
.\"        The '.g' register is only found in GNU 'troff', and it is
.\"        assumed that GNU troff will always include the www.tmac
.\"        macro package
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac

.\" Macro: Ellipsis
.\"  usage: .ellipsis
.\"  note: only works at beginning of line
.de ellipsis
.cc ^
...
^cc
..

.\" String: Command name
.ds self msmtpq

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" MANPAGE CONTENT
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------

.TH "MSMTPQ" "1" "2022-11-01" "" "MSMTPQ Manual"
.SH "NAME"
\*[self] \- mail queue handler for msmtp
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.BR "\*[self] " "["
.BR "\-\-q\-mgmt " "[ "
.IR "\-r" "|" "\-R" "|" "\-d" "|" "\-p" "|" "\-a" "|" "\-h"
.R " ] ]"
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SS "Usage"
.I "\*[self]"
attempts be useful to
.I "msmtp"
by holding mail sent by an mail user agent (MUA) when a system, e.g. a laptop,
is not connected to the net. Queued mails are held as files in a user-defined
and created queue directory. When the machine is connected all mail can be sent
directly out; otherwise it queues the mail.
.PP
.I "\*[self]"
takes care of the management and routing of outgoing mail. Normally sending a
mail is nearly instantaneous, but a very long mail, e.g., one with large
attachments, can take some time to make its way through. It is therefore wise
to have the mail user agent background the process if possible.
.PP
Unless run in queue management mode (see OPTIONS below),
.I "\*[self]"
is invoked as a drop-in replacement for
.IR "msmtp" "."
That is:
.IP \[bu] 2
It is invoked with the same options as
.I "msmtp"
.IP \[bu]
Recipients are specified on the command after a \(aq\-\-\(aq
.IP \[bu]
The mail content is read from standard input.
.SS "Configure locations"
Three environment variables control file and directory locations critical for
the operation of
.IR "\*[self]" ":"
.TP
.I "MSMTP"
Set this variable to point to the location of the msmtp executable. Set this
only if necessary, i.e., if it is not on the path. If you are running a normal
Linux distribution msmtp should be on the execution path by default.
.TP
.I "MSMTP_Q"
Set this variable to point to the location of the queue directory. Please note
that it's preferable to create the queue directory (with 0700 permissions)
before using these routines.
.TP
.I "MSMTPQ_LOG"
This variable should have the desired name and location of the queue log. Set
it to an empty string (\(aqexport MSMTPQ_LOG=""\(aq) to disable logging.
.br
.R " "
.br
Note that the default msmtpq set-up creates a separate log for queue
operations. This is distinct from the
.I "msmtp"
log set by the \(aqlogfile\(aq setting in
.IR ".msmtprc" "."
.SS "Configure behaviour"
Two further environmental variables control the operation of
.IR "\*[self]" "."
.TP
.I "EMAIL_CONN_TEST"
This variable configures what test is used for the net connection:
.br
if
.RI "=" "x"
will suppress any testing for a connection
.br
if
.RI "=" "p"
or unset will use a ping test (debian.org) for a connection
.br
if
.RI "=" "P"
will use a fast ping test (8.8.8.8) for a connection
.br
if
.RI "=" "n"
will use netcat (nc) to test for a connection
.br
if
.RI "=" "s"
will use bash sockets to test for a connection
.TP
.I "EMAIL_QUEUE_QUIET"
If this variable is set it suppresses unnecessary queue 'chatter'. (This may
perhaps be useful for some of the emacs mail clients.)
.PP
These variables can be part of the command which invokes
.IR "\*[self]" "."
Multiple environmental variables may be used on the command line, space
separated, before the
.I "\*[self]"
invocation. For example, the mutt configuration variable \(aqsendmail\(aq might
be set using the command:
.PP
.RS 4
set sendmail = "EMAIL_CONN_TEST=p EMAIL_QUEUE_QUIET=y /path/to/msmtpq"
.RE
.SS "Log rotation"
On a Debian or Debian-based system a file can be created in
.I "/etc/logrotate.d"
(named, e.g., 'msmtp') that configures logrotate to compress and rotate both
the
.I "msmtp"
logs and
.I "msmtpq"
queue logs.
.PP
Suggested contents of this file are:
.PP
.RS 4
/home/xyz/log/msmtp.log /home/xyz/log/msmtp.queue.log {
.br
  rotate 9999
.br
  weekly
.br
  compress
.br
  notifempty
.br
  missingok
.br
}
.RE
.PP
Adjust the log file paths as necessary.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.IR "\-\-q\-mgmt " "[operator]"
Run
.I "\*[self]"
in queue management mode. Optionally accepts a single parameter as operator
(default:
.IR "-d" "):"
.TS
tab (:);
cb  lb
c   l.
Operator:Action
\-r:run (flush) the queue
\-R:send individual mail(s) in queue
\-d:display queue [default action]
\-p:purge individual email(s) from queue
\-a:purge all mail in queue
\-h:show help
.TE
.br
.R " "
.br
.I msmtp-queue
is a wrapper script which calls
.I "msmtpq"
with the
.I "\-\-q\-mgmt"
argument. The user optionally provides an operator as the sole parameter
(default:
.IR "-d" ")."
.SH "FILES"
See description above of the environmental variables MSMTP, MSMTP_Q and
MSMTP_LOG, which define key files and directories used by
.IR "\*[self]" "."
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR "msmtp " "(1),"
.BR "msmtp-queue " "(1),"
.BR "logrotate " "(1)."
.SH "AUTHOR"
\*[self] was written by David Nebauer (david at nebauer dot org).
.PP
This manual page was written by David Nebauer (david at nebauer dot org)
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
