.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-

.\" Filename: i3-my-load-clipboard.1
.\" Author:   David Nebauer
.\" History:  2022-12-11 - created

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" NOTES
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.ig

For header (.TH), first parameter, NAME, should be all caps
Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
Other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.

Some roff macros, for reference:
.nh        disable hyphenation
.hy        enable hyphenation
.ad l      left justify
.ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.nf        disable filling
.fi        enable filling
.br        insert line break
.sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
for manpage-specific macros, see groff_man(7) and man(7)

Formatting [see groff_char (7) and man (7) for details]:
\(aq  : escape sequence for (')
\[dq] : plain double quote
\[lq] : left/open double quote
\[rq] : right/close double quote
`     : left/open single quote
'     : right/close single quote
\(em  : escape sequence for em dash
\(en  : escape sequence for en dash
\.    : escape sequence for period/dot
\(rg  : registration symbol
\(tm  : trademark symbol
\fX   : escape sequence that changes font, where 'X' can be 'R|I|B|BI'
        (R = roman/normal | I = italic | B = bold | BI = bold-italic)
\fP   : switch to previous font
        in this case '\fR' could also have been used
.B    : following arguments are boldened
.I    : following arguments are italicised
.BI   : following arguments are bold alternating with italics
.BR   : following arguments are bold alternating with roman
.IB   : following arguments are italics alternating with bold
.IR   : following arguments are italics alternating with roman
.RB   : following arguments are roman alternating with bold
.RI   : following arguments are roman alternating with italics
.SM   : following arguments are small (scaled 9/10 of the regular size)
.SB   : following arguments are small bold (not small alternating with bold)
        [note: if argument in alternating pattern contains whitespace,
               enclose in whitespace]
.RS x : indent following lines by x characters
.RE   : end indent

Bulleted list:
   A bulleted list:
   .IP \[bu] 2
   lawyers
   .IP \[bu]
   guns
   .IP \[bu]
   money
Numbered list:
   .nr step 1 1
   A numbered list:
   .IP \n[step] 3
   lawyers
   .IP \n+[step]
   guns
   .IP \n+[step]
   money
..

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" SETUP
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------

.\" Macro: Format URL
.\"  usage:  .URL "http:\\www.gnu.org" "GNU Project" " of the"
.\"  params: 1 = url
.\"          2 = link text/name
.\"          3 = postamble (optional)
.\"  note:   The www.tmac macro provides a .URL macro package; this
.\"          is a local fallback in case www.tmac is unavailable
.\"  credit: man(7)
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..

.\" Prefer .URL macro from www.tmac macro package if it is available
.\"  note: In the conditional below the '\n' escape returns the value of
.\"        a register, in this the '.g'
.\"        The '.g' register is only found in GNU 'troff', and it is
.\"        assumed that GNU troff will always include the www.tmac
.\"        macro package
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac

.\" Macro: Ellipsis
.\"  usage: .ellipsis
.\"  note: only works at beginning of line
.de ellipsis
.cc ^
...
^cc
..

.\" String: Command name
.ds self i3-my-load-clipboard
.ds engine i3-my-load-clipboard-engine
.ds conf i3-my-load-clipboard-data.json

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" MANPAGE CONTENT
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------

.TH "I3-MY-LOAD-CLIPBOARD" "1" "2022-12-11" "" "I3-MY-LOAD-CLIPBOARD Manual"
.SH "NAME"
\*[self] \- load user-selected value into the system clipboard
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B "\*[self]"
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SS "Usage"
The user selects from menus of pre-defined options. The selected option is
loaded into the system clipboard.
.PP
A submenu is indicated by an option with an appended \(aq-->\(aq. Selecting
such an option opens a submenu.
.PP
Menu options have a one character prefix (a hotkey) to enable quick option
selection.
.PP
The script executes in an alacritty terminal.
.SS "Design"
The i3 window manager has two limitations that affected the design of this
script:
.IP \[bu] 2
It is not possible to define a binding in the configuration file that executes
the script directly in a terminal
.IP \[bu]
When the script executes in a terminal it is not possible to directly write to
the system clipboard.
.PP
Because of these limitations it was necessary to use two scripts. The primary
script,
.IR "\*[self]" ","
is able to be used in an i3wm binding. When run it invokes a secondary script
called
.I "\*[engine]"
in an alacritty terminal. The secondary script handles user selection of an
option and writes the selected value to a temporary file. When control passes
back to the primary script it reads the selected value from the temporary file
and writes it to the system clipboard.
.SH "CONFIGURATION"
.SS "Menu contents"
The menu content is defined in configuration file
.IR "\*[conf]" "."
The general structure of the menu is:
.PP
.RS 4
[
.RE
.RS 8
{"a": "Item 1"},
.br
{"b": "Item 2"},
.br
{"Submenu;c": [
.RE
.RS 12
{"p": "Submenu item 1"},
.br
{"r": "Submenu item 2"}
.RE
.RS 8
]},
.br
{"c": "Item 3"},
.br
{"d": "Item 4"}
.RE
.RS 4
]
.RE
.PP
While the structure is largely self-explanatory, its major features are:
.PP
.IP \[bu] 2
The data is valid JSON.
.IP \[bu]
The outer data structure is an array.
.IP \[bu]
Each menu item is a single name-value object. (In perl a JSON object is known
as a hash. In other languages it is an associative array.)
.IP \[bu]
The name (or key) for each menu item is a single character 'hotkey'. This
hotkey must be unique within each (sub)menu.
.IP \[bu]
A submenu has a name (or key) composed of the menu name and hotkey joined by a
semicolon. The menu name must be unique.
.IP \[bu]
A submenu has a JSON array as its value. This array has the same structure as
the outer array.
.IP \[bu]
The name of the outer menu cannot be defined in the configuration file. It
defaults to 'Main'.
.IP \[bu]
There are special tokens which signify the current date in a particular format.
.IP \[bu]
The menu item value must contain only the token string with no additional
characters. See below for available date tokens.
.PP
The available date tokens are:
.TP
.I "%current_date_full%"
Example: 1 December 2022
.TP
.I "%current_date_full_nbsp%"
As for \(aq%current_date_full%\(aq except that spaces are replaced with
non-breaking spaces
.TP
.I "%current_date_iso%"
Example: 2022-12-01
.TP
.I "%current_date_rfc%"
Example: Thu,  1 Dec 2022 18:51:37 +0930
.br
The system time zone is used and day numbers less than 10 have a leading space.
.SS "i3 window manager"
In the i3 window manager the wrapper script can be invoked from a binding that
can be set in the
.I "config"
file. For example, to launch it with the F2 key use the following configuration
command:
.PP
.RS 4
set $loader_launcher ~/.local/bin/i3-my-load-clipboard
.br
bindsym F2 exec --no-startup-id $loader_launcher
.RE
.PP
The wrapper script launches this script in an alacritty instance. To ensure the
terminal window is free-floating add a line like this to the i3wm 
.I "config"
file:
.PP
.RS 4
for_window [class="Clipboard_Loader" instance="Clipboard_Loader"] \\
.RE
.RS 16
floating enable, resize set 1000 600
.RE
.PP
Adjust the \(aqclass\(aq and \(aqinstance\(aq values as appropriate.
.PP
If the picom compositor is being used add a line like the following to its
.I "picom.conf"
file to ensure the alacritty terminal is opaque:
.PP
.RS 4
opacity-rule = [ "100:class_g *?= 'Clipboard_Loader'" ];
.RE
.PP
Adjust the \(aqclass\(aq value as appropriate.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-x   \-\-debug"
Print expanded commands as they are expanded. Optional.
.TP
.B "\-v  \-\-verbose"
Print script lines as they are read. Optional.
.TP
.B "\-h  \-\-help"
Display basic help and exit. Optional.
.SH "FILES"
.B ~/.local/bin/\*[self]
.IP
The primary script used to select a value to write to the system clipboard.
.PP
.B ~/.local/libexec/\*[engine]
.IP
A secondary script called by the primary script and which runs in an alacritty
terminal.
.PP
.B ~/.config/i3/\*[conf]
.IP
Menu configuration file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR "alacritty " "(1),"
.BR "i3 " "(1),"
.BR "picom " "(1)."
.SH "AUTHOR"
\*[self] was written by David Nebauer (david at nebauer dot org).
.PP
This manual page was written by David Nebauer (david at nebauer dot org)
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
