.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-

.\" Filename: i3-my-cycle-kbd-led-profiles.1
.\" Author:   David Nebauer
.\" History:  2025-01-27 - created

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" NOTES
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.ig

For header (.TH), first parameter, NAME, should be all caps
Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
Other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.

Some roff macros, for reference:
.nh        disable hyphenation
.hy        enable hyphenation
.ad l      left justify
.ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.nf        disable filling
.fi        enable filling
.br        insert line break
.sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
for manpage-specific macros, see groff_man(7) and man(7)

Formatting [see groff_char (7) and man (7) for details]:
\(aq  : escape sequence for (')
\[dq] : plain double quote
\[lq] : left/open double quote
\[rq] : right/close double quote
`     : left/open single quote
'     : right/close single quote
\(em  : escape sequence for em dash
\(en  : escape sequence for en dash
\.    : escape sequence for period/dot
\(rg  : registration symbol
\(tm  : trademark symbol
\fX   : escape sequence that changes font, where 'X' can be 'R|I|B|BI'
        (R = roman/normal | I = italic | B = bold | BI = bold-italic)
\fP   : switch to previous font
        in this case '\fR' could also have been used
.B    : following arguments are boldened
.I    : following arguments are italicised
.BI   : following arguments are bold alternating with italics
.BR   : following arguments are bold alternating with roman
.IB   : following arguments are italics alternating with bold
.IR   : following arguments are italics alternating with roman
.RB   : following arguments are roman alternating with bold
.RI   : following arguments are roman alternating with italics
.SM   : following arguments are small (scaled 9/10 of the regular size)
.SB   : following arguments are small bold (not small alternating with bold)
        [note: if argument in alternating pattern contains whitespace,
               enclose in whitespace]
.RS x : indent following lines by x characters
.RE   : end indent

Bulleted list:
   A bulleted list:
   .IP \[bu] 2
   lawyers
   .IP \[bu]
   guns
   .IP \[bu]
   money
Numbered list:
   A numbered list:
   .nr step 1 1
   .IP \n[step]. 3
   lawyers
   .IP \n+[step].
   guns
   .IP \n+[step].
   money
..

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" SETUP
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------

.\" Macro: Format URL
.\"  usage:  .URL "http:\\www.gnu.org" "GNU Project" " of the"
.\"  params: 1 = url
.\"          2 = link text/name
.\"          3 = postamble (optional)
.\"  note:   The www.tmac macro provides a .URL macro package; this
.\"          is a local fallback in case www.tmac is unavailable
.\"  credit: man(7)
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..

.\" Prefer .URL macro from www.tmac macro package if it is available
.\"  note: In the conditional below the '\n' escape returns the value of
.\"        a register, in this the '.g'
.\"        The '.g' register is only found in GNU 'troff', and it is
.\"        assumed that GNU troff will always include the www.tmac
.\"        macro package
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac

.\" Macro: Ellipsis
.\"  usage: .ellipsis
.\"  note: only works at beginning of line
.de ellipsis
.cc ^
...
^cc
..

.\" String: Command name
.ds self i3-my-cycle-kbd-led-profiles
.ds cache_fp ~/.cache/g512-led/last-profile-details
.ds default_profile profile
.ds max_cycle_interval 60
.ds off_profile off
.ds profiles_dir /etc/g810-led

.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" MANPAGE CONTENT
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------

.TH "I3-MY-CYCLE-KBD-LED-PROFILES" "1" "2025-01-27" "" "I3-MY-CYCLE-KBD-LED-PROFILES Manual"
.SH "NAME"
\*[self] \- cycle through g512-led/g810-led profiles
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B "\*[self] "
.RB "[ " "\-v " "]"
.RB "[ " "\-x " "]"
.br
.B "\*[self] -h"
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\*[self]
The keyboard LED management tool g512-led stores its profiles in the directory
.IR "\*[profiles_dir]" "."
.PP
This script requires that at least 2 profiles are present:
.IP \[bu] 2
an 'off' profile named \[lq]\*[off_profile]\[rq]
.IP \[bu]
a default profile named \[lq]\*[default_profile]\[rq]
.PP
Each time this script is run it disables the current profile and activates
another profile.
.PP
The actual command that is run is
.B "g512-led -p ${profiles_dir}/NAME"
where NAME is the name of the profile file.
.PP
The name of the last profile selected by this script, and the time it was
activated, is stored in the cache file
.IR \*[cache_fp] "."
.PP
If this script is run within \*[max_cycle_interval] seconds of the previous
script execution, it simply advances to the next profile in alphanumeric
sequence, wrapping around after the last profile name is reached.
.PP
If this script is run after \*[max_cycle_interval] seconds of the previous
script execution, it toggles between the \(aqoff\(aq and default profiles.
That is, if the previous script execution selected a profile other than the
\(aqoff\(aq profile, the current execution activates the \(aqoff\(aq profile;
and if the previous script execution selected the \(aqoff\(aq profile, the
current execution activates the default profile.
.PP
Fatal errors result in an abort message being written to the console and
displayed in a system notification.
.PP
If a new profile is successfully activated a message is written to the console
and displayed in a system notification.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-v  \-\-verbose"
Print input lines as they are read (equivalent to
.BR "set -o verbose" ")."
Flag. Optional. Default: false.
.TP
.B "\-d  \-\-debug"
Print input lines after command expansion (equivalent to
.BR "set -o xtrace" ")."
Flag. Optional. Default: false.
.TP
.B "\-h  \-\-help"
Print help text and exit. Flag. Optional. Default: false.
.SH "FILES"
.I \*[profiles_dir]
.IP
Directory containing profile files.
.PP
.I \*[cache_fp]
.IP
Cache file holding details of most recent profile selection by \*[self].
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR "g512-led " "(1)."
.SH "AUTHOR"
\*[self] was written by
.URL "https://github.com/MatMoul" "MatMoul" "."
.PP
This manual page was written by
.URL "david at nebauer dot org" "David Nebauer"
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).

